# Louisville Bike Accidents
### louisville-bike-accidents.git

This is a data project for the Code Louisville / Code:You Data Analysis Pathway, Spring 2023 Cohort

In this project, I look at bicycle accident reports in Jefferson County, Kentucky from 2010 to 2023.

The goal of my project is to determine the most dangerous conditions to ride bicycle in the Louisville Metro area. I am an avid cyclist myself in this city, and I love to promote cycling here. My hope is that I can gain some insight to make everyone's bicycle rides around the city a little safer.

## Quick Start

1. Create a virtual environment to install modules.

    In a terminal, run `python -m venv venv`

1. Install requirements

    In a terminal, run `pip install -r requirements.txt`

1. Run the cleaning scripts in `02_cleaning/` directory

    To run these scripts, open a terminal and run `python {filename}`

    The files prefixed by `01` can be run in any order, but these must be run before `02_merge_accident_data.py`. 

1. Open and run `03_analysis.ipynb` to read through my analysis process. 

1. Optional but encouraged: Enjoy a nice bike ride and be safe!

## Directory and file map for this project:
### Source data
#### directory: /data/raw

The source data for my project. 

Since I am dealing with multiple datasets, I use a short "codename" for each file. In various scripts, you will see `LOJIC`, `CSAFE`, or `SIGNALS` as a variable name for the Dataframes, or other data objects I use to keep track of and manipulate the source data. 

| codename | file name: data/raw/... | description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| LOJIC | Louisville_Metro_KY_-_Traffic_Fatalities_and_Suspected_Serious_Injuries.csv | Crash reports from 2016-2023 (Updated regularly) in Jefferson County, KY. This data was found on the Louisville Open Data portal. It includes reports of all crashes during its timeframe. This includes motor vehicle crashes and pedestrian incidents. |
| CSAFE | cycling_safety_louisville.csv | Crash reports from 2010-2017. This data was part of a European study on cycling safety. |
| SIGNALS | Jefferson_County_KY_Signalized_Intersections.csv | Road intersections in Jefferson County, KY which have traffic lights. |

### Discovery

#### directory: /code/discovery

Jupyter notebooks for data discovery on this project's source data. 

| codename | notebook name |
|----------|---------------|
| LOJIC | discovery_LOJIC.ipynb |
| CSAFE | discovery_cycling_safety.ipynb |
| SIGNALS | other_discovery.ipynb |

`other_discovery.ipynb` expects `cycling_safety_louisville_cleaned.csv` to exist. An exception will be raised if that file cannot be found. Please run `01_cleaning_cycling_safety.py` before you try to run the cells in this notebook. However, this notebook was only used to test some code that ended up in `02_merge_accident.py`. It's not necessary to run the notebook project analysis to work. Only the Pytho files in `02_cleaning/` are necessary. I only left this notebook in to show my development process.

### Cleaning

#### cleaning scripts directory: /code/cleaning
#### precleaned data directory: /data/preclean

For each of the source datasets, I first did some cleaning to remove unwanted data and make these easier to combine. This directory contains the resulting .csv files from that cleaning process.

Run `python {cleaning file}` to generate a cleaner CSV for each source file. `01_cleaning_LOJIC.py` and `01_cleaning_cycling_safety.py` can be run in any order, but they must both be run before `02_merge_accident_data.py`

| codename | clean CSV name: data/preclean/... | cleaning script code/cleaning/... |source file |
|----------|----------------|-----------------|------------|
| LOJIC | LOJIC_cycling_data.csv | 01_cleaning_LOJIC.py | data/raw/Louisville_Metro_KY_-_Traffic_Fatalities_and_Suspected_Serious_Injuries.csv|
| CSAFE | cycling_safety_louisville_clean.csv | 01_cleaning_cycling_safety.py | data/raw/cycling_safety_louisville.csv |
|  | bike_accidents.csv | 02_merge_accident_data.py | preclean/cycling_safety_louisville_cleaned.csv, preclean/LOJIC_cycling_data_cleaned.csv |


#### Final cleaning result: /data/clean

Final clean data I can use for analysis. This directory contains one CSV file which is generated by `code/cleaning/02_merge_accident_data.py`. This CSV file is called `bike_accidents.csv`

The directory also includes `data_dictionary.md`, a markdown file with a data dictionary explaining the cleaned data.

### Analysis

`03_analysis.ipynb` is a Jupyter notebook wherein I analyse my cleaned data.

## Course Requirements

These are the parts of my projects which satisfy the requirements for the Code:You / Code Louisville Data Analytics Pathway.

| Requirement Section |  |
|---------------------|-|
| 1. Loading data | I have read in two CSV files to form the main base of my project. |
| 2. Clean and operate on data | I have combined two datasets using pandas.concat to extend the time range for analysis.

I have also brought in data from a third CSV file, and incorporated information from it into my final clean data. I use SQL via the pandasql library to do this. |
| 3. Visualize data | Throughout my discovery notebooks and my analysis notebook I have included plots to visualize the data. | 
| 4. Best practices | Virtual environment: I have included a requirements.txt file for setting up the virtual environment. There are instructions in my README file under the heading "Quick Start" for setting up the environment. 

Data dictionary: I have included a data dictionary for my final cleaned data, we well as my raw input data.|
| 5. Interpretation of data | I have done my best to explain the cells in my Jupyter notebooks with Markdown cells and comments as necessary.

Python files have also been annotated with comments and doc strings as I have seen fit.| 
